the problem with modern civilization in
many ways is that that we are so
obsessed with predicting everything and
making everything straight line and and
and dependable and not being irritated
by anything that our mind sort of falls
asleep in a sense and and everything is
like the prediction we come with and we
need some somehow to sort of refresh uh
our sensory input from time to time and
I think uh many ways to U sort of get
around your everyday reduction of the
[Music]
world hello everybody I'm speaking today
with Tor nanders who's a Danish author
I'm primarily interested in his work
he's written about 30 books the book I
know best is probably his most famous
book called the user illusion I've been
thinking a lot about Consciousness
lately it's a what would you say a
preoccupation of mine and I A A few
decades ago I spent a lot of time
reading books on Consciousness um the
user illusion Tor norrander book was the
best one of the lot as far as I was
concerned and it taught me a lot and so
I figured the other day that I'd reach
out to him we haven't talked before and
so
that was what happened and I got a
chance to investigate his thought more
elaborately we talked a lot about
Consciousness as a reducing function um
which is a very interesting way of
conceptualizing it uh it's something
akin to eldis huxley's speculations
although he elaborated it in much more
detail and much and very usefully and
also Associated that with our ability to
communicate verbally in a way that I
think was in keeping with the relevant
neuros pychological literature and what
we know about perception so norrander
hit the target very specifically and I
thought it'd be fun to talk to him about
that and to share that with all of you
and so that's exactly what's going to
happen so Mr Nord trenders I really
became interested in your work because
of the user illusion which I read quite
a long time ago probably about 10 years
after you published it I believe it was
published in
1991 and
yes I was
98 oh okay okay so so I see all right so
it probably would have been around 98
when I when I read it I was quite
interested in the in the psychology of
Consciousness but I had a hard time
finding any books that I thought were
really credible you know I read Dan
dennett's book and I also read Jeffrey
Gray's Book and gray is a Real Genius uh
he he wrote a book called The neuros
pychology of anxiety which I think is
one of the best Neuroscience books ever
written maybe the best but I didn't
think his work on Consciousness hit the
mark the same way your your book however
um I thought it was unbelievably helpful
and I want to focus on one element of it
maybe you can tell me how your thinking
has developed I really liked your idea
of and let me make sure that I actually
get this
right you talked about linguistic
communication as a form of
unpacking right it was like a sequ a
sequence of compressions okay so I want
to walk through that because I don't
know how much of this now is my idea and
how much of it is yours because it's
been so long since I read your book but
so this is how it seems to me and then
I'll I'll have you comment on it
so I've been trying to understand what
it means to understand something we use
that word understand it's an interesting
metaphor so I'm I'm thinking about
Consciousness as a
multi-tiered phenomenon
so I'll start uh with a description of
the world so we're we're in the you
could imagine the material realm is a
place of
patterns and complex patterns some of
them last for a long time some of them
are short term they differ in scale but
the material world is a place of
patterns and then on top of that living
creatures have a behavioral realm and
they interact with one another but their
behavior also codes the material world
because we have to just like if you're
walking across a field your pathway is
going to map the
terrain the behavior of living creatures
Maps the physical patterns and it Maps
the interactions
between mostly between them and members
of their own
species okay and then now in the human
case you have two additional layers of
what's real you have an imaginative
realm and the imaginative realm seems to
me to be where we capture the patterns
we primarily capture the patterns of
behavior in the imaginal realm that's
what a dream does because dreams have
characters and the characters act out a
drama of sorts more or less coherent we
make that more coherent in literature
and in drama in fiction
and so that's the imaginal realm and
then on top of that we have the
linguistic realm and it seems to me and
I think this is in keeping with your
ideas that the linguistic Maps the
imaginal and it can be unpacked into the
imaginal and the imaginal can transform
the
behavioral but all of that there's a
Harmony between all of that that
constitutes something like understanding
and so the first thing I'd like to know
is like does that bear any resem Lance
to your ideas and and then what do you
think of that
conceptualization I think it's very
complicated in a sense I would I would
like to to start with a more uh basic
sort of observation which is the
observation that if you look at at our
sensory if you look at the sensory
system of human being our eyes our skin
our hearing and and smell and taste and
all that there's an enormous amount of
information that goes into uh us for in
every second and you can measure that
and in fact that has been measured since
mid last century H and people didn't
really know what to do with that
information because it's a pretty high
number nowadays people are acquainted
with the with the concept of bit uh the
bit of information and it it turns out
that it's it's something of the order of
11 million bits per second enter our
sensory
apparatus on the other hand you could
you can ask
yourself how much can we be consciously
aware of and again you can measure this
there's been measurements of this since
the 60s of last
century and the interesting thing about
this number for how much you could be
aware of is that it's so much smaller
than what we actually take in from our
the world around us uh like we take on
the order of 16 bits per second from the
outside world into our
awareness but we take 11 million bits
from the outside world into our system
whatever that is so so so the problem or
or or the difficult thing to understand
is that there's a reduction of a factor
1 million from the sensory intake to
what we actually aware of right and that
seems immediately very surprising so
somehow Consciousness conscious
awareness is very different from sensing
the world when you talk about patterns
and recognizing patterns that will be
the sensing of the world that every
every animal would have to do and we do
of course also to to survive but what is
that which we are conscious about H and
it's it's a tiny little part of what we
take in and of course most of what the
information we take in at every any
second is not really uh worth uh
contemplating in that second like I see
behind you windows and it's obvious that
these windows are not falling down on
you and you don't have to reassure
yourself every second they're not
falling down they're not falling down
they're not falling down that wouldn't
be very helpful so you have to select
what you are aware of and the point
about Consciousness then is and this is
where the linguistic part enters the the
equation the point about consciousness
is that if you take the the origin of
the word Consciousness it's from Latin
it's cons skira it's knowing together so
when I take in a lot of information from
the outside world a and I'm aware of a
little of it it's very much so that what
I'm aware of is what I share with other
people I point to something and say it's
red and you have a concept of red I have
a concept of red uh and somehow we sort
of calibrate our way of seeing stuff um
but there's more to the quality of red
that by I actually see so Consciousness
is about sharing awareness of the outer
world or the inner world uh in a very
very compact fashion compared to what we
actually take in and therefore the
language is very important the social
relationships are very important the co-
awareness is very important and you
could say uh that the whole the whole
show starts with pointing when you have
infants you point and when they're old
enough they actually understand that the
interesting thing about pointing is not
the finger but what it what it is
pointing at some animals understand that
also but sort of directed shared
attention uh is very much sort of the
stuff of Consciousness so it's it's it's
in a way it's a social thing uh it's
something you share with other people
but of course you can have Consciousness
on your own and most of us have a lot of
conscious awareness without other people
being involved but that's sort of the
the the the collective mind that we have
internalized so that we can share our
experience with other people without
actually talking to them or or being
present together with them and so so
that was a major theme of this book was
trying to sort out this thing that we
are we're doing an enormous selection in
what we are aware of in conscious
aw okay so I want to I've got a three or
four things to to elaborate on from that
okay so I want to lay out another schema
so the things I here's what I'm going to
dig into you talked about pointing you
talked about the Consciousness we have
when other people aren't around you
talked about sharing and
trade so let's let's dig into each of
those so so I've spent a lot of time
trying to figure out how stories what a
story is and how stories shape what we
point our attention to okay so I
understand that relationship between
pointing and and verbalization but also
pointing and specification of attention
Okay so I'm going to I'm going to bring
in some other ideas and I'll get you to
comment on them so I was quite taken by
my studies of JJ Gibson so Gibson wrote
a great book called the um ecological
approach to visual perception and I
think there's some brilliant things in
it and I've been elaborating on Gibson's
ideas in the context of of narrative and
I guess narrative is relevant to the
idea of sharing because a lot of what we
share are stories and I think stories
are Pointers to Value that's a way of
thinking about it so so let me lay out a
phenomenological world for you and tell
me what you think about this so imagine
you specify uh a point with your aim
okay so now you're determining a
destination this is what FL what bees do
when they communicate about where the
pollen and the and the nectar is in
flowers they specify a treasure House of
value okay so that's the that's the
point that's the
destination okay so from the from
Gibson's perspective once you establish
a point then the world lays itself out
as perceptible objects and some of those
are tools they're all what he called
affordances they're all they're all the
phenomena that are now relevant to that
goal and you can break them he broke
them into roughly into two classes
tools and so a tool is something you can
use to move yourself along your pathway
and
obstacles and I've been thinking about
elaborating that so I think what happens
when you when you specify a
point with your aim let's say you your
your perceptual system produces a
pathway
forward right that's your root and then
the root is accompanied by the things
that are relevant you you talked about
the fact
that you know we we are taking in 11
million bits per second but compressing
that to 16 almost all that we perceive
is obscured as irrelevant it's not even
part of our conscious experience so what
stands out well pathways
then tools and obstacles so those would
be like material those would be material
entities but then I think there's a
parallel in the social domain friends
and
foes so friends share your aim and
accompany you along the way and they can
be helpful and foes are human obstacles
but also can obscure or interfere with
your aim so tools
friends o obstacles f and then there's
one other element which I think is very
cool I just figured this
out I think the other thing that we
perceive are agents of
transformation and those would be like
magical creatures in a fairy tale and an
agent of transformation changes your aim
and the reason they're magic is because
the world of the aim that they specify
doesn't play by the same rules as the
rule of the aim that you
inhabit right so okay so now the the
reason I'm telling you this that's
relevant to it's relevant to the
pointing idea because that's kind of the
landscape that emerges as a consequence
of pointing but it also is relevant to
the sharing idea um I've been thinking
that you know when we speak with each
other we're offering each we're offering
the fruits of our imagination that's a
way of thinking about it each word is
actually a storehouse a value or a
pointer to value and so you could say
the reason consciousness D and this
seems to be very much in keeping with
your thinking is
that we can offer people pointers to a
destination or specify a destination and
again that's not much different than
bees do when they're you know when
they're doing a dance to specify where
the honey is and so it's the fruits of
our imagination that we can encapsulate
in words and maybe we have that private
Consciousness our ability to think on
our own so that we can build up a
storehouse of value so that we actually
have some to trade with other people
okay so well so that's a that's a take
on the things that you just described so
I'd like to know what you think about
that it I come to think of of of the uh
of the Paradigm of predictive processing
which has been very uh influential in
the past 10 years in in understanding
how we perceive the world Carl Frist a
British guy is one of the leaders of of
the field and and the basic idea there
was a philosopher very much in in in
explain yob hovi explaining this
Paradigm of predictive processing who
kind enough to say that the that the
Deep idea behind it actually was in this
book the user illusion oh oh that's cool
that's cool it's nice of him to say so
yeah yeah yeah but but the point is that
what I what US illustion tries to say is
that first we take in information and
then we create create a sort of a
simulation of what that information is
and then only then do we experience we
don't experience the right take in we
experience our own retelling of what we
take in and predictive processing
Paradigm is is is basically saying that
all we experience when we go about in
our stuff in the world is our
predictions of what will happen next
what will this guy do what will this
monkey do uh will there be a fault in
the terrain when I walk there so it's
all about predicting so in that sense
it's all about storytelling everything
we know about the world is storytelling
and then of course it it turns out very
often that our stories are wrong we are
corrected uh we we we understand that
there was something wrong and so we
correct our storytelling we we make it
more and more qualified and we and and
when we get to know people we we have a
better uh ability to to know what to
expect from them and so on but it's all
a question of creating a story not
inconsistent with the information we
take in and there's one thing here
that's I think is very deep and that is
if you take
children they're afraid of the
dark you go into the forest in the
evening H as a kid and you are scared uh
because of of what could be in the dark
if go there in the daytime you're not
scared at all why is that that's because
there's nothing to
contradicts the inner fantasies of the
kit when it's dark there's no
information that runs counter to the
idea of many many weird trolls and
demons out there but in in the daylight
there's so much information that
contradicts your ideas so in a way all
of our perception of the world is a
hallucination we
create under the condition that it does
not contradict the sensory data we take
in so we are constantly constantly
telling stories so telling stories is
what perception is all about and of
course human beings have taken this to a
higher level than we expect a mouse to
take it to but it's basically the same
phenomenon that we we try to create a
consistent idea of what the world is
like but it's what we experience is our
own dream if you like or our own fantasy
or better word is our own
hallucination um and it it so this will
explain all the things we see uh in in
when when when the light falls and and
you you enter into to Twilight Zone and
then suddenly there's not enough
information to contradict all the weird
ideas you have in your
head do you ever read the fine print
that appears when you start browsing in
incognito mode it says that your
activity might still be visible to your
employer your school or your internet
service provider to real stop people
from tracking your online activity you
need to do what I do and use expressvpn
think about all the times you've used
Wi-Fi at a coffee shop the airport or
work without expressvpn every site you
visit could be logged by the Admin of
that Network which is still true even
when you're in incognito mode what's
more your home internet provider can
also see and record your browsing data
in the US they're legally allowed to
sell that data to advertisers expressvpn
is an app that encrypts all of your
network data and reroutes it through a
network of secure servers so your
private online activity stays just that
private expressvpn works on all your
devices and it's super easy to use the
app literally has one button you tap it
to connect and your browsing activity is
secure from prying eyes stop letting
strangers invade your online privacy
protect yourself at expressvpn.com
Jordan use Jordan's Link at
expressvpn.com Jordan to get three extra
months free that's e p svpn / Jordan
tolearn
[Music]
more yeah yeah so you talked about
friston so okay so I'm going to go down
that rabbit hole for a while first of
all I interviewed him for this
podcast second of all with a two
students of mine uh Jacob hirsh and
Raymond Maher we wrote a paper about the
same time that friston was working on
his entropy theories on anxiety as an
index of entropy
and so this is partly what I talked to
friston about yeah yeah well and it ties
in with this idea of root specification
to a treasure
so friston pointed out that and and this
was in keeping with the work that we
were doing that if you're imagine you've
specified a route to a given valuable
destination you're proceeding along it
and all of a sudden there's a an
obstacle arises that makes the path more
complicated and maybe inp initely more
complicated so you're driving to work
and your car quits well you're not going
to get to work and that's that means the
complexity of your day has radically
increased especially maybe if you're on
the outs with your with your boss plus
all the other routes that are dependent
on the functionality of your car have
all been thrown into disarray that's an
entropy problem it's marked by anxiety
so a lot of negative emotion is an
entropy increase marker but friston
pointed out something fascinating see I
hadn't figured this out which was
that if you move forward to a specified
destination so let's say a specified
Treasure House each step you take that
works decreases entropy because the path
to the Treasure House is now shorter and
requires less energy expenditure so he
could actually relate both positive and
negative emotion to the concept of
entropy this Maps really nicely on this
gibsonian view because if you have let's
say obstacles and foes well they elicit
negative emotion and they tell you that
your path is in danger your pathway or
the aim is in danger and on the positive
emotion side you have tools and friends
and they indicate that the pathway to
your destination is clear and maybe even
more efficient than you'd hoped and so
okay so there there's that so that's
cool because it ties emotion all the way
down to entropy which is a very
fundamental grounding of the and it also
includes emotion now inside the
narrative frame and so then you
mentioned prediction and so you know I
mentioned Jeffrey gray and Gray's work
on anxiety is based on a prediction
model but I found that that was
inadequate and I'll tell you why and you
tell me what you think about this see
the prediction model the expectation
model has kind of a cold cognitive
element to it it's it's like you're a
calculating machine and what you're
trying to do is minimize discrepancy
between what you expect and what plays
out in the world but if you you can
tweak that slightly and substitute
desire for expectation and that way you
can pull in all the motivational systems
so one good way of conceptualizing
motivation as opposed to emotion it's a
rough split is that a motivation system
sets a
goal so obviously lust does that thirst
does that hunger does that um anger does
that and so it specifies an
aim and then the emotions the negative
and positive emotions calibrate in
relationship to that aim and so what
your what Your contrasting is actually
desire specified by motivation rather
than like a rationalistic EXP
expectation and I like that because
otherwise you're in the expectation
models or the prediction models
motivation doesn't have a place and
that's a big problem because obviously
there are ma multiple instinctual
motivational systems and a lot of the
stories we tell are predicated on those
jealousy stories or Quest stories or
rage stories they're predicated on the
operation these fundamental motivational
systems okay so there was there I tossed
at you the entropy issue from friston
and then also the issue of motivation so
I'd like your thoughts on those on those
ideas I I think you are very right in
saying that that it easily becomes too
technical if you think about prediction
and and and and testing your predictions
but uh emotions are basically all about
testing your predictions so it's it the
emotional language is another way of
expressing the same mechanism that you f
you feel fondness for someone because
you expect good stuff to come out of
your interaction or you you you fear
someone because you fear that bad things
will come out that these are emotions so
basically what you see when you perceive
something is already packed with
emotions there's an example of of uh if
if you go into a a forest and there's a
small tree trunk there the the lowest
part of a tree it's it's fallen over in
the storm but there's only a small part
of the tree trunk left uh in in in the
forest um and you come there in in in in
bad lighting and you see that thing and
it looks to you like a
troll like some alien weird uh creature
um now what would be the rational thing
to do here for a perception system would
that be to to analyze closely the thing
and then decide no it's the tree it's
it's it's the bottom of a tree it's not
it's not a TR or would it be to say oops
it's a troll I better react on that of
course the the meaningful thing is to
start with the worst hypothesis in that
situation it's a troll right and then
because if it is in fact as the remnants
of a tree well it'll stay that way so
you have time to find out so the way we
perceive is you're of course familiar
with the gastal psychology the idea that
that it's a whole sort of creature it's
a
whole uh body of the creature you see
rather than details we don't sort of
analyze the image of a person from one
end to the other we immediately see
something and we immediately have an
emotional response to that and we all
know that that we meet people in life
that in the split second we know I like
this I don't like this guy I like this
woman I don't like this woman we are
very fast in our uh in our emotional
response to what we take in so so yes it
certainly is a very emotional process
and I think when you try to an part of
the reason that when people Analyze This
prediction processing model uh as very
intellectual is that it was inspired
very much by the training of robots
because to train robots you had to use
the same idea of of sort of of moving
towards something that you liked rather
than that you all the AI systems do that
right they're all goal trained all of
them and that's why they can now mimic
human cognition even linguistically
right it's very interesting that's
that's right that's it's all
reinforcement learning towards a goal
exactly yes we do that but but but I
want to say on the pointing on on on
that's what you what you were saying
about pting reminded me of something I
read in a book many years ago by L
Watson a British biologist who most
famous for his book super nature that he
wrote In the late 70s I think H he's
very interested in Supernatural
phenomenon that's that it's what I find
personally most interesting but he's
very interested in that and he has one
fantastic example in that book and that
is if you have the EG of of of a frog
and you uh and and the Egg to become uh
a new frog needs the sperm from from the
male
frog uh and it turns out it doesn't
really need the DNA from the sperm what
it needs is the asymmetry introduced by
the sper
sperm moving towards the egg so it's
more like the then the moment that you
introduce the asymmetry into the
spherical egg
this is the point then the egg will
reorganize and become uh a very small
embryo for a frog so the idea
so it's I'm not trying to say that sperm
is not relevant to frogs or to humans
not that at all but it's more that the
Symmetry breaking you have a sphere and
you introduce this is the difference
this is a point and all that's like a
reduction well that's like the reduction
that Consciousness consists of so and
that's and that's that's that's a point
so so okay so a couple of things I want
to talk about your your idea that
children hallucinate Terror in the face
of lack sensory information well that's
a good definition of the negativity bias
right and the idea would be well if you
can't tell what's going
on the worst case come is you die
painfully and and immediately and since
that ends the whole game you should be
very uh attuned to that and so as you
pointed out misapprehend a tree stump as
a troll is a zero almost a zero cost
mistake misapprehend a troll as a tree
stump that means you're dead right and
so and that's really relevant because
people have this pronounced negativity
bias and you could imagine too that in
landscape that where the sensory
information is poorly
specified the
mapping the mapping faculty of the
imagination has free reign and the fact
of that free reign that's a high that's
a high entropy state in and of itself
right because if you don't know where
you are or what's going on anything
could be happening and anything isn't
emotionally neutral it's terrifying as
as story that's perent to that and and
also to your uh your interest in anxiety
is is is a concept from Danish doctors
uh in the 17 and 1800s uh in Greenland
you know Greenland part of the Danish
Kingdom and and uh we had doctors going
up there to help uh people there and
they observed a weird phenomenon they
call kayak angst that's Danish for kayak
anxiety
the greenish uh uh people went out in
kayaks to hunt seal and other stuff and
they were very skilled and able and and
and and skill and and clever people but
sometimes they suddenly had a very
strong uh anxiety episode and they
refused to go ever again out in a kayak
which is oh yeah oh yeah pretty bad if
you're if if that's your living going
out in the kayak hunting for seals and
other stuff and and danish doctor said
Ah that's just because they drink too
much or they have too much coffee or
whatever but it it turned out that that
it's it's a true phenomenon in the sense
it it has no simple explanation other
than the fact that if you sit on a
kayak and the sky is blue and the ocean
is blue and everything is blue yeah yeah
you suddenly lose sort of the the
orientation yeah and and and you see
weird things happening uh Pilots report
the same thing when they fly into to to
clouds they lose orientation and they
suddenly see weird stuff you have John
ly putting people in the 60s and in
these isolation tanks with body War
water and no sound no vision no anything
and after a few hours they start
hallucinating weird stuff you don't have
you you don't have to LSD they will
hallucinate just if you take away their
sensory
experience and yeah well that you're
pointing to something very important
there which is that
pointlessness is chaotic and
anxiety-provoking a priority well this
is a really useful thing to know
ethically and psychologically because
part of what it means is that the point
constrains Terror like it's it's better
than that if if friston's model is right
not not only does the point constrain
existential Terror but it also elicits
hope and so that would mean to some
degree that the sharper the point and
this is sort of analgous to the sperm
idea the sharper the point the more what
would you say the more promising and the
less threatening the terrain right so I
don't know if you know this you probably
do but you know the word
sin is derived from an archery
term and the yeah the archery term is
Greek actually the derivation is the
same in three languages three separate
languages came to the same conclusion
Aramaic if I remember correctly Hebrew
and Greek the Greek term is hamartia and
hamartia means to miss the
Target and so right to sin is to
misspecify your aim right and the worst
sin of course would be to aim in the
opposite direction or perhaps not to aim
at all right there's some ambiguity
there both of those are very bad but I
think we actually understand this
neurophysiologically it's much in
keeping with what you just said that
kayak anxiety my wife experienced that
once when she was
swimming she had the sense that she
became suddenly aware of the cavernous
volume of the lake that she was in and
it it it didn't scare her so much she
never swam again but it scared her
enough so that she talked about it for a
couple of years when she went swimming
but it sounds it's so interesting it's
it's that it's that
sudden realization of the expansiveness
of everything you know here's a weird
side note from that in the story of
Exodus um when the Israelites are lost
and Po and aimless in the desert they
get all fractious and continually
and they Rebel and like they behave very
very badly they Mis aim constantly and
at one point Moses their leader is very
upset with them and he Retreats away
from them along with God and but keeps
his faith and his point his Direction
and as a reward God decides to show
himself a little bit more to Moses but
he does something odd when he does that
he puts Moses in the Clift of a rock so
he can hardly see anything and when he
walks by he just lets Moses see us back
and part of that the reason I'm bringing
that up because that's protection that's
protection against kayak anxiety right
you can well imagine what would happen
if we all of a sudden became aware of
the 11 million bits per second instead
of the
16 and even that 11 million is a
compressed version of actually what's
there right because even that itself is
is highly
screened so have you looked at the
Psychedelic research pertaining to
percept okay tell me tell me what
because it sounds sounds similar right
it sounds like what's happening with
psychedelic exper experience is that the
domain of the narrowed
Consciousness expands and you get a
massive increase in positive emotion
because of that but also a potential
massive increase in negative emotion the
whole emotional landscape multiplies and
do you does it seem to you logical that
that is a movement that's neurologically
induced
towards like away from the 16 bits per
second more to the 11
million yes I and I think Alis harkley
in this book dos of perception from the
50s of
60s that I quote uh in in the user
illusion book he uh he used masculine I
think it was and yeah it was masculine
and and talked about this this opening
of of of the mind and and by many of
course his seen as sort of very early
bird in what's happening now these years
with the psychadelics uh and the studies
of uh how psychedelics will will change
the Outlook of human beings on the world
and allow them to take in um different
kind of information and and perhaps very
much um and Carl friston by the way is
is involved in some of that work also
yeah yeah uh and it people talk about
this psychedelic Revolution going on
right now which will have a a huge
impact on on many of of of the the uh
the the problems people have with their
with anx xiety and and with depression
and so on uh because it will open the
mind and uh it it gives sort of a direct
attention and I think the problem with
modern civilization in many ways is that
that we are so obsessed with predicting
everything and making everything
straight line and and and dependable and
not being irritated by anything no rain
no wind no interruptions that our mind
sort of uh falls asleep in a sense and
and everything is like the prediction we
come with and we need some Som how to
sort of refresh uh our sensory input
from time to time and I think there are
many ways to to do that uh psychedelics
is certainly one physical exercise is
another meditation is another uh there
are many ways to uh sort of get around
your everyday uh reduction of the world
are you or someone you know fighting the
battle against cancer for the last 25
years invita medical centers have been
pioneering personalized cuttingedge
treatment programs for patients all over
the world invita has been the leader for
patients looking for advanced
immunotherapy and genetically targeted
therapies all while focusing on fewer
side effects and better patient outcomes
as a global leader in oncology care
invita is committed to healthcare
freedom for all they've spearheaded a
revolution in employer health Insurance
options empowering companies to provide
their employees with access to not only
Top Doctors Hospitals and Technologies
but also the first ofit kind Nationwide
personalized medicine coverage invita is
doing all of this plus offering
significant tax and cost savings full
transparency and Liberation from the
grip of commercial insurance carriers
whether you're a patient in need or a
company looking to break free of
monopolized healthcare insurance invita
could have the solution for you to learn
more about their treatment option visit
inv vita.com or visit invit health.com
to learn more about their company
insurance programs that's invita spelled
en
nv.com for treatment options or inv vah
health.com to learn more about their
company insurance
programs so so some of friston's
co-workers have been making the
psychophysiological claim that what the
psychedelics are doing is Ain into a
stress response like it's a highly
magnified stress response and the logic
there is something this is relevant to
the issue of point so imagine that
you're reducing the 11 million bits to
16 okay now then imagine all the ways
that that reduction could conceivably
occur like all the different ways 11
million bits could be reduced to 16
there's a lot of them okay now the
advantage to the reduction is you you
only have to deal with 16 but the
disadvantage is well what if you're
pointing in the wrong direction okay so
let me tell you a story and you tell me
what you think about this so I think
that's what the Tower of Babel story is
about okay so because so let let me let
me outline it so the Babylonian towers
that that story refers to were generally
ziggurats and a zigurat is a structure
that has a point at the top it's
essentially a p it's a stepped pyramid
and at the top that story emerged the
Babylonian Kings there were many of them
were engaged in the same kind of
competition you see in modern cities
right they were going to build the
highest tower and that would announce
the builder of the tower as something
Ain to God like a god Emperor and so
these were God Emperors of the
technological
Enterprise the people who build the
towers of Babel in the biblical story
are the descendants of Cain okay so
they're resentful and miserable and
genocidal they're a bad lot and they're
the first Builders of cities and it's
those people that build the towers of
Babel and so these are points in the
wrong direction right so because what
the what the B as far far as I can tell
what the biblical Corpus is attempting
to do is to specify a point it's the
point of the Cross actually but it's
trying to specify a point as an antidote
to the pathological points that might
otherwise emerge what happens in the
Tower of Babel story is that as the
tower increases in presumptuousness
that's a good way of thinking about it
and and sort of a a bitter and and what
would you call it a bitter and prideful
rigidity even the ability of the people
who inhabit the tower to communicate
becomes
impaired right and this ties into our
discussion because we've already made
the case that words themselves are
something like pointers of value right
they're compressed Point as a value and
if the value hierarchy itself is path
pathologized if the point is wrong well
then the words are going to become not
only meaningless but in some ways
counter to to meaning itself and that
that seems to me also relevant to the
point of let me see there was another
element that you brought in that was but
oh yes I know what it is when when the
when the psychedelics hit let's say if
that's a magnified stress response
imagine if your point is very Miss
aligned well what you could do is reduce
the intensity of the point and broaden
the attentional
Horizon and the danger there is now
you're in the desert but there's many
possible directions now that you could
go right so it could snap you out of a
false point and I think that's why
people find these experiences or can
find them transforming and Illuminating
right is because they they allow people
to replace that pathologically narrowed
point that has depressed them or left
them nihilistic with a reintroduction
into the Richer Rich richer sensory
realm with the possibility of a of a
reor
reorientation I think that's very true
in in the sense that what we basically
did when we moved from being hunter
gatherers
toist uh who were uh cultivating the
land and and and taming the wild animals
into into our animals so
which is the story that the Bible is
about that most monolithic uh
monotheistic religions are about this
transformation from H gatherers to
Farmers and the farmer believes that
everything come from his work from his
little piece of land and from what he
puts into it the the the Hun gatherer
thinks that everything around him brings
him something evil or good stuff nice or
not nice stuff edible or not edible
stuff but the world is open and you go
into it and you find something you would
like to eat the farmer believes that he
controls and creates everything so I
think it's very much also that's
interesting it's about sort of
Contracting yourself to the city uh and
building up in the city rather than
going out into the open land and and
finding something to eat and I think
much of the way we have evolved uh in in
Social terms in the past actually 10,000
years since we introduced agriculture
has been more and more Contracting
ourselves to a small space controlling
everything and forgetting about the wide
open space out there and and even if if
you look at at at this what you see when
you're going into a landscape controlled
by agriculture you see Concepts you see
wheat or you see rice or you see uh maze
or you see very basic stuff but it's all
the same so it's like a concept that has
been transformed into a field rather
than if you go to the Wilderness there
so many different things at the same
time and so we have we have compressed
enormously this information and and we
live in a simplified world that we
created ourselves we found it efficient
uh that's why we did it but it it also
uh takes away from our mind the ability
to see to see multitudes and I think
what what what happens then you could
say we take out entropy from our life
and and what happens with with I think
with people who experiment with the
psychedelics is that they experience
suddenly this multitude coming back they
open up their minds to
multitudes so that's interesting so
there there's another biblical illusion
there possibly you know in in the story
of Cain and Abel so the Builders of the
Tower of Babel are Cain's descendants
but Cain is an
agriculturalist right and so you could
imagine so tell me what you think of
this hypothesis so that as the
agricultural Endeavor got underway you
pointed out that one of the consequences
of that was that people started to
believe that the world was a place where
the fruits made themselves available as
a consequence of direct human labor and
and effort and that could be contrasted
with the hunter gatherer maybe even with
the herder that would be able with The
Herder mentality which is more like well
it's more it's a more it's a more
wandering and diverse way of looking at
the world now you could imagine that as
agriculture got established that did
enable the aggregation of more and more
people right the builder of the building
of larger and larger and more integrated
civilizations and you could imagine that
as well pointing to exactly the outcome
you described which would be the
presumption of civilization right and I
mean the prideful presumption in a sense
now you're talking about a a a very
strange sort of complex compression
because your point is that once
we transform the world into a linguistic
Matrix and conceptualize it we can can
then transform the world itself into an
analog of that Matrix so that so is that
partly what accounts for your interest
in in agriculture because I know you've
written books that are relevant to that
endeavor as well I was wondering what
the connection was right because it's
not obvious no it's not obvious at all
um and and
and in many ways it was an accidental
event in my life that I became
interested in nutrition and the way we
produce food and how it
it it uh it influences our body but then
I then I what what really changed my
attitude to all this and and was
fantastic experience for many years was
that I it dawned on me suddenly that um
the real problem in the way we produce
food these days is that it's so over
agricultural lied it's over abstract
it's over civilized in a sense and that
we've forgotten all about what nature
itself provides and offers us in the
form of wild food for and you can you
can you can you can measure generation
after generation uh that people lose
knowledge of the richness of the real
world uh of what's out there on its own
wild and wild means of its own will it's
it's having a it's not our will it's
it's the Na's will and then I in
studying that I came across a trend in
cooking
in find in in Gastronomy in
restaurants that happened also to have
its leading force in my own country of
Denmark in the maybe you've heard about
the restaurant n which was started like
20 years ago and became after 10 years
the leading restaurant in the world
which was absurd because Denmark in
terms of gastronomy has always been sort
of a joke nobody would ever consider
Denmark to be a country where you would
go for f dining and people would fly in
and than
England what yeah worse than England yes
yeah that's not good we sold the good
bacon to the British and had the bad
bacon ourselves so yeah yeah Denmark was
was a m mud pile of of shitty Gastronomy
but suddenly you had the best restaurant
in the world and why was that that was
because that byi the chief the chief
chef of Noma a good friend uh he became
um a friend um Renee said we only want
to serve stuff that grows where we are
and grows at the time we serve it the
seasons in which we serve it so we will
forget about all imported Foods we will
forget about all the agricultural foods
and we will serve the wild foods for
people on the
plate and that was a radical idea that
turned out to to be fantastic in terms
of of taste and and smell and and and
and all that stuff
but it was also a fantastic idea because
when he then gathered uh chefs from all
over the world who were interested in
his way of thinking uh in in a number of
of big events he called mad which is the
Danish word for food uh where you had
all these people and I was I was so
lucky that he asked me to give the
opening lecture for these for these
events and my basic point was that we
moved from Wild to tame and now we'll be
moving back again in that we moved away
from Wild food all that nature offers we
wanted to control everything and we
ended up as a species eating almost only
four crops it's really surprising if you
if you if you count the number of
calories that human beings eat um more
than 50% of these calories come from
just four crops like wheat and uh and
rice
and potato and lace and so on corn I
think you call it um
and no monkey would would accept that
monkeys eat 300 different kinds of of
vegetables uh but we eat only four and
all the the brain power of the chefs is
used to make four very boring uh things
to eat uh edable all year around so so
you have chefs that come in and and can
can take
a potato or a steak or whatever and make
that interesting in interesting in
interesting in 500 different ways so
Gastronomy and and fine dining has sort
of collapsed into taking a few very poor
uh raw materials and making them
interesting even though they're poor and
the new trend is to use the skills and
the intelligence of the chef to go out
into the wild nature and say what is
edible here it takes a lot of skill and
a lot of knowledge and a lot of care to
to bring it to the plate and to make it
taste good but then it's much much
richer than anything you get out of with
control civilized agriculture so the the
revolution or the Renaissance in in fine
dining was to understand that chefs
should go out and study the edibility of
planet Earth rather than to create
fantastic recipes with with their
Gastronomy skills right right so that's
a return oh that's so interesting
because because that's that's a return
that's a return to the to the to the
garden with
multiple with to the to what would you
say to the Abundant Garden it's it seems
to me that there's a powerful analogy
there that the if we think of what the
chefs are doing as a form of art that
your sense tell me if I've got this
right it's in keeping with what we've
been discussing
that that
civilizational hyperfocus on four crops
has abstracted us away from the
underlying entropy so that's good
because we don't die but also from the
immense quality that's associated with
that richness and so a fine dining
experience like the one you're
describing is a reintroduction back into
that plenitude I'm wondering if Beauty
itself can be concept ized that way you
know because a modern the modern
Architects built these buildings that
are extremely pointed right they called
them machines for living that was the
Germans contribution to the blight that
constitutes our cities right machines
for living hyper efficient pointers in a
single Direction and they got rid of all
excess ornamentation but we could say
that the excess ornamentation is
actually a pointer to the plitude beyond
that merely efficient Point like here's
something I figured out about the
difference between Japan and the United
States back in the
1980s so I did a lot of different
reports on the Japanese economic M
Miracle back in the 1980s and one of the
things I learned about the Japanese is
that if they get the point right they're
unbeatably
efficient but sometimes they get the
point wrong in which case they're moving
like mad in the wrong direction which is
an engineering problem right you can
imagine hyper efficient Engineers
pointed in the wrong direction like they
are in China with the surveillance State
well in the United States which is a way
more diverse
society which also has a much higher
tolerance for eccentricity and
criminality the Americans are incredibly
robust because there's always something
crazy going on somewhere in the United
States where the new Point might be
established you know when you get that
homogeneous society that's pointed to a
single pinpoint if that becomes the
wrong direction which it tends to across
time anyways then it's pathological
efficiency in precisely the wrong
direction so there's this you know in
the da Ching the Dao itself which is the
proper pathway through life the proper
journey is a balance between chaotic
plitude and pointed order right it's not
order itself it's not the narrowing of
the plenitude to a single point it's the
dynamic balance between them and okay so
one of the things I've been thinking
about is that that the sense of meaning
the Instinct of meaning you could think
about that as a kind of meta motivation
it's like an amalgam of motivations that
have become unified and that's what
lends your life the sense of meaning
right the sense of meaningful Pursuit
that seems to be a marker to me it's a
biological Mar marker for the optimized
balance of plitude and
focus right so it it it retains the
focus that's enables you to be efficient
enough to get to where you need to go
because that's obviously relevant if
everyone was walking around on LSD all
the time nothing would ever get done
because you can't focus there's just
everything is amazing and of course
that's amazing but you know what are you
going to do if you have to eat so but
then if you narrow too much you get the
problem that you're describing and
you're seeing that reflected in the
agricultural enterprise right it's this
this hyper so it's it's a focus on four
crops but it's also a reduction of the
plenitude of the material world itself
in accordance with that mapping with
that initial mapping see I think we do
this to each other too you know is that
it's something very dangerous in
relationship is that you build a model
of the person you're with because you
want to predict them and control them
that would be the cognitive you know the
cognitive explanation and then what
people do is they punish each other for
deviating from that expectancy set and
that keeps them you know narrowed and
boxed in but over time it turns your
relationship into well people get bored
because they've people get bored with
their spouse often because they've turn
them into a simulacrum of their
imagination they interact with the idea
of the other person rather than with the
person an analogy I think for all for
this kind of discussion is is a raindrop
uh running down uh
the hillside or the mountain side if you
had an engineer to solve this problem we
have this raindrop at the top of the
mountain and we want it to the bottom he
would take his ruler and he would draw a
straight line and say that's the way to
go de a raindrop and the Raindrop will
say no I can't do that and he will come
with some kind of machine and dig a
channel for it to run down and now what
the rain real raindrop does of course is
to go a little this way a little that
way around obstacles and DS in a zix
saac motion all the way down and what it
does all the time is to move downwards
but downwards is not the same all the
way along so it it becomes a very rich
uh thing rather than a straight line I
think William Blake uh the the British
poet and painter uh uh some hundred
years ago uh he said that the the the
the the straight the the the straight
the straight road is the road of of of
of of the
intellectual road is the road of
Genius
yeah the straight road can become the
road of the luciferian
intellect right that's really attempting
well so and also in the D Ching you know
that that raindrop analogy is is used
quite frequently in the da Ching to to
refer to the DA because the da is
exactly the course that water takes when
it finds its way down hill and you might
say well why not make it hyper efficient
and the answer is well what richness do
you sacrifice in that single-minded
efficient Pursuit right and it's a
tricky business because you could
imagine you're you know in a in a
relationship you're trying to negotiate
two things you obviously have to come to
terms with one another so that there's
some mut ual understanding and some
prediction and some control but then at
the same time you want to have the
person develop and transform if you have
any sense and you want to have enough
variability in their behavior so that
they're still well interesting which is
good indication of the relationship
between meaning and that balance between
Order and Chaos is like if you sterilize
your relationship with an excess of
predictability you you just your fantasy
will start taking you into other
relationships that's what'll happen
right everything that you've sacrificed
to that single-minded aim will make
itself manifest in the imagination
that's pulling you to a richer
experience so know one of the things
that I did when I was doing marital
counseling for my clients was if they
were dissatisfied with their with their
spouse let's say said well what are you
fantasized about in relationship to a
new relationship right what what
fantasies spontaneously enter the
theater of your imagination and they
they would tell me you know in as much
detail as was necessary and I would say
well why is it impossible for you to
seek that within the confines of this
relationship you know it might be well
she's not like that or he's not like
that or she would never do that or he
would never act that way it's like
well people are pretty damn strange and
there's a lot of mystery in them and if
if you're uh
dancer you can get a lot
of
interesting possibility out of people
where you thought there was only a
stultified actuality one of the things I
noticed as a therapist and as an
interviewer you know if my clinical
session got
boring it was because I wasn't paying
enough attention I was substituting my
presumption for the person and so if I
have attended more deeply they would
start revealing more of themsel and then
they'd become like and this was even
true for so-called simp there's no
simple people but I had lots of clients
who were they weren't intellectually
gifted put it that way you know they
were people who would have been
struggling you know often they didn't
have a high school education some of
them weren't even literate but if you
got
them out of the box that maybe you
wanted to put them in they were just as
unbearably interesting as anyone
else and that's there's a norvegian
writer uh fiction writer called Axel
simus who who wrote in one of his books
that that man which does not who does
not understand that any woman contains
every woman in right right he's an
idiot I mean the way you approach your
spouse is is understanding she is every
woman in this universe and that that
could be uh someone you don't like or
someone you like or as ects of being a
human being is present in that other
human being and the same of course goes
for me as a man in that same
relationship that I'm the best of men
and I'm the worst of men y y y yeah and
and the one of the reasons that it's
it's it's a it's a good thing to to
stick to your relationship to to be
faithful to your relationship is then
you allow this multitude of
possible persons to be there the moment
you start thinking oh I would like
rather to go over here or there or I
would like to change things in that and
that way and have have another object of
my love then you reduce that person and
you don't see the the depth the the
richness inside inside that other person
and I think that's what a strong and
good relationship is about that is what
love and openness is about is to allow
the other person to be fully Rich fully
full
wonder my wife just about died a couple
of years ago and and so did I at about
time time like like it was a narrow it
was a narrow path pathway you know and I
had a pretty good relationship with her
before that very good I would say I've
known her since she was like 8 years old
so we've known each other mostly our
whole life you know and she changed
quite a bit after she was ill and really
for the better once she started to
recover and I was much more I would say
grateful to have her around I mean not
that that wasn't there to begin with it
was already there I loved my wife but
the the like the
demonstrative like a true demonstration
of the possibility of her absence woke
me up a bit more and one of the things
that's happened is that now when I see
her
I can see her at every stage of her life
at the same time it's really something
and also what's happened like she shed a
lot of her self-imposed constraints in
the aftermath of her brush with
mortality it lasted like nine months it
was very torturous experience so she
changed a lot it's taken multiple years
for the full manifestation of that
change and it still hasn't happened but
it's a wonderful thing to see her and
maybe it's also reflection of my change
in Attitude like she's taken off a lot
of self-imposed constraints I think
we're afraid of our own entropy and know
our own possibility and in doing that I
would say she's become more like a child
again you know and and there's there's
insistence in that in Wordsworth for
example also biblical insistence you
know that unless you become his little
child you can't enter the kingdom of
heaven and it has something to do with
that imaginative plurality that you
described right because one of the
things that's magical about children is
their capacity to magically transform
and to enchant the world and they do
that because they're going in many
directions they're not narrowed and you
know that makes them in need of
discipline and civilization but there's
something wonderful about that so I'd
like you to comment on that but I'd also
like to ask you you know what you just
said about relationships that's not
something that everybody knows so I'd
like to know how you figure that
out hard hard work uh
how did I figure that out yeah that well
and you can say it not only did you
figure it out but you can articulate it
and so yeah
um that's a good question I don't know
the answer to it actually uh but I I I
think that it's um it's I've always had
a tendency to be very monogamous is that
what how you say the word in English
yeah yeah yeah and faithful uh to but in
in the modern world I mean you you're
serly
monog you have you you have have more
than one relationship but one after the
other as a young person you have several
girlfriends but you're faithful to each
of them all the time is is that
understandable absolutely yeah and and
so I I and that was unusual in the
circles I live where living in in the
70s that people were sort of all over
the place all of them and I was like
sort of I had this Instinct for monogamy
and I was sort of wondering why is that
so and I realized that it it it was
because it made me
uh discover and and explore the richness
of the other person instead of just
comparing uh to someone else and and
wanting to change someone else and then
of course I've been cultivating that
emotion and that way of living for for
quite some decades now and and it it I
think it's very obvious that that the
moment you
start comparing
people yeah that's a
commodification yeah and you see the
label this guy I'm talking to has these
opinions and this track record and so on
and and and you you you confuse the
person for for the lb
yeah and all you see is the labeling and
and life becomes very boring and of
course what I've been doing with food
and agriculture what I've been doing
with how we how how our cognition system
works what Consciousness is all about uh
I've been doing a lot of work also with
environmental issues and so on it it's
the same basic story all the time that
we confuse uh sort of the the label for
the real thing we confuse the terrain
for the map yeah the concept for the
real stuff and and I think that what we
do when we are not sort of faithful in
our love
relationship is that we uh we do
comparisons all the time instead of
saying okay this is it I'm not a perfect
man in any sense but all aspects of
masculinity and many aspects of
femininity
is in me Y and and and and that's every
person is a
universe did you know fast growing trees
is the biggest online Nursery in the US
with more than 10,000 different kinds of
plants and over 2 million happy
customers they have everything you could
possibly want including fruit trees
Evergreens house plants and more find
the perfect fit for your climate and
space fast growing trees makes it easy
to order online your plants are shipped
directly to your door in 1 to 2 days
days along with her 30-day alive and
Thrive guarantee I just overhauled my
front yard with all new spring blooms
and fast growing trees really Sav the
day with their fast delivery and
professional consultation we saved so
much time and hassle not having to go to
a nursery and our hydranges and lavender
plants arrived in beautiful condition
whether you're looking to add privacy
shade or natural beauty to your yard
fast growing trees has in-house experts
ready to help you make the right
selection growing and Care advice is
available 24/7
this spring shop their best deals online
and get up to half off on select plants
listeners of Jordan show get an
additional 15% off their purchase with
code Jordan checkout that's 15% off at
fastgrowingtrees.com with promo code
Jordan checkout fastgrowingtrees.com
code Jordan offer is valid for a limited
time terms and conditions May
apply right right well this is certainly
something that I learned in this is why
I love doing
Psychotherapy because
that the art of psychotherapy is to have
that realization making itself manifest
constantly during the conversation right
because that and that means the person
is on the cusp of optimized
transformation so I've been thinking
about this tell me what you think about
this I think this is extra cool so I
spent a lot of time looking at the
misalignment of aim I spent a lot of
time investigating evil a lot and evil
is actually something you can point to
quite simply in some ways it's a rare
person who wouldn't think that a
sadistic owitz guard who enjoyed his job
was that's evil and and people will
dispute that but you don't have to talk
to the people who will dispute that you
know you it's not it's not it's not
useful it's fairly easy to point to but
the antithesis of that is not easy to
specify like good is good as such is
harder to specify as a point than evil
is but I think you tell me what you
think about this so I spent a lot of
time studying Yak
PP who I think is absolutely brilliant
you know about PP yeah well he's SP aot
yeah yeah emotion and motivation but he
spent a lot of time studying
play especially in children and he was
the first person to identify the play
circuit in mammals that it was actually
a special specialized circuit and to
differentiate it from the exploratory
circuit because a lot of
neurophysiologists had presumed that
exploration and play were identical
they're aligned because they're both in
the positive emotion space but there is
a separate circuitry for play and I
think that
play I think play is the antithesis of
tyranny and I think that play is the
place where that plitude makes itself
manifest in a manner that doesn't blow
the frame badly enough to
terrify right so yeah right exactly so
so you can see that right I mean that's
why children are driven to play but
that's also so in your relationship you
said that you've been able to discover
let's say a multitude within yourself
and within your partner and that and
that you've also practiced that which I
would like to also ask you about like my
sense with my wife is that when when
we're doing things when things are
optimized we're playing house that's a
good way of thinking about it that that
sense is replicated in our adult life
and it's what children are aiming at
when of course they do that kind of
pretense play when they're when they're
young so I want to know what you think
about that idea of Play Because play
also has to be voluntary right it it
can't be compelled no force in play you
know unless you're playing Force which
you know is a special case you can do
that but it's still voluntary so I'd
like you to to tell me what you think
about the play idea and then I'd also
like you to you said you've practiced
this way of looking at things so I'd
like to know about that because people
don't understand what a practice like
that is you know we practice all sorts
of things like basketball skills but we
don't practice perceiving other people
as a multitude let's say that's not a
standard practice so play and then that
practice I play I agree is is beautiful
and wonderful and I think it also it's
it's it's a wonderful example
the the two concepts I would put up
against each other would
be evil and
love rather than evil and good and
that's because I I see everything is
relational in my worldview I don't have
sort of entities out there apart outside
human interaction there's something evil
in itself there's evilness a lot of it
in human interaction and love in a lot
of it I see evil as closing uh the
barrier to the other person ignoring
their their their pain ignoring their
problem ignoring that you do bad stuff
for them I see love as the total
openness h i i exchange everything with
you I don't with withhold anything I
don't I don't reject anything I just
take it because it comes from you and I
love you um and and in in that sense I
say players is a wonderful example of of
exercising the ability to uh to exchange
fully with the other
person well while EO is I don't want to
play with you I don't want to I don't
want to have anything to do with you I I
have done with many audience
audiences a little game that I call the
tickling
game which was inspired actually by a a
new a new psychological experiment done
many years ago in England by a group of
scientists who were studying um whether
you could tickle
yourself right right which you can if
you're schizophrenic apparently exactly
and Chris sth who made that Discovery
was part of this group oh okay okay so
they made a tickling machine so you
could move you know sticks that in a
complicated way would actually tickle
your skin and then could tickle yourself
even if you are not a schizophrenic
because you know when and how the
tickling would be but basically when you
tickle yourself your brain already knows
what your hand is doing so there's no
ticking sensation but if you tickle the
person next to you uh he or she will
will have a giggling and and and it will
tickle and sometimes I do with with
audiences I ask people experiment two
rounds first round tickle yourself
doesn't tickle
very basic um second round you tickle
the person sitting next next to you on
the left and you and you have these 800
people going from just sitting there to
yelling and screaming and uh no in two
second it's dramatic effect and then you
say oh somebody didn't get any fun here
so now you T to your right people scream
and yell again and this is a beautiful
example of in my view of that
the only thing that's interesting about
other human beings is that they're
surprising or they surprise us they do
things that we cannot control that's why
they're so interesting and so nice to us
we like being surprised yeah yeah but of
course if you went into the to the
um to the what you call the Subway uh
the Metro train the uban the S the train
in the city
and suddenly somebody would tickle you
that wouldn't be fun that would be scary
so you don't want to you don't want no
no control like in the train and you
don't want full control like when you
tickle yourself what you like is sort of
the in between of between control and
and and and predictability on the one
hand and lot of control on the other
hand and that's that's the nice thing
that's
the do you suppose that okay so you
contrasted evil with love and
so one of the things I was thinking
about when you were talking about this
game was that like it seems to me that
love is Manifest most clearly in a state
of
play one of the things I've noticed with
my wife for example is that if there's
anything between us you know an obstacle
conceptual obstacle a disagreement about
something it's much more difficult to
enter into that state of play that has
to be clear cleared away before that can
really happen and so that's an that's in
keeping with pp's findings because PP
found that play was very easily
suppressed by virtually any other
motivational state right so things have
to be optimized okay and
then I wonder if that if that
play like is a play is play a reflection
of the love that puts someone on the
border between the predictable and the
unpredictable in that optic IED way you
know cuz you see people doing that if
you're playing one-on-one basketball
with someone you want a competitor who
pushes you right you you don't want to
be exactly in your zone of comfort you
want to be a little bit outside that
right you want to have that it's a
glimmer of what's being suppressed by
your aim you want to have that still
around it's like a Halo that's another
way of thinking or penumbra something
like that right something that's
glowing that REM Rems you of everything
that you're not attending to at the
moment there's something very rich about
that and you know your your thoughts
about monoculture agriculture for
example are an indication of
the you know there's a there's a there's
a there's an insistence in the Old
Testament this is very relevant this is
something I've been discussing with some
my friends a
lot when the Old Testament people set
out their
fields you know there's there's always
some uncertainty about
borders so there was an insistence in
those societies that the margins were
for Gleaners right that's where the poor
could find their sustenance and the idea
under that was that your boundaries
although necessary shouldn't be so tight
that there's no room for experimentation
and the marginal right which I think and
also I found out in keeping with this by
the way you know there's a hierarchy of
DNA repair as a consequence of M mut
ation so there's there's core DNA
structures that if they mutate they're
repaired with 100%
accuracy right and then there's a
hierarchy so that peripheral there are
peripheral genetic codes that are
allowed to mutate because
experimentation can take place there On
The Fringe without demolishing the ho so
that's Echoes that Echoes that idea of
the center you know the focal center
with the experiment Al Fringe that that
seems to Echo everywhere and that's
something like the antidote to that
narrow-minded technological efficiency
that when did you start to become
concerned with that specifically was
that associated with your investigation
into
Consciousness uh with the uh agriculture
problem or yeah yeah the idea of this
pathological narrowing yeah I think it's
already in the in it's very much in the
Consciousness thing um uh not of course
as fully developed as it became later
but it but this this worry that if you
exchange sort of the the terrain with
with a map the world with a concept uh
the uh the person with the idea of a
person which is very much what
Consciousness does then you you're
you're you on the wrong on the wrong way
there's a thing about our language um
which I think was pointed out about 100
years ago uh which is which is a very
basic thing about language we say this
flower is
red but no this flower is many things
yeah one of them having the color of red
this man is
angry yes but this man is also many
other things than angry this man that's
why I don't like sort of to to make evil
and objective thing in the world because
I think this man is evil yes but he's
also other stuff this man is good he's
caring and so we are not the the we are
not the mental States the emotional
states the trait states that we have we
are more than that we are we are much
richer and we have a language that all
the all the time we say he is uh happy
yes but he's he also needs to go through
the tlight at a moment you know you
understand so so I
think studying Consciousness very much
brought my attention to this very very
simple fact that we tend to reduce
everything H and it's it's practical in
the sense that I can point to the to the
flower and say it's red you can n and
say it's red and and we are in
correspondence here and it's good but we
also lose each of us lose a lot of the
experience and the and the sensing of
the flower if we reduce it to being
red have you talked to Ian Miguel
Christ no I've heard his name yes okay
well so I just I know I and then we just
did another podcast which will be
released soon so his sense he's done a
lot of Investigation into hemispheric
function right and his work is very much
in keeping I would say with with the
main thrust of your
work the and and I think he's got the
neuros pychological terrain mapped quite
nicely is that the right hemisphere
seems to be I would say more comfortable
in the domain of plitude and the left
hemisphere is is the reducer and um you
know
the it's possible tell me what you think
about this on an ethical side because
we've talked about I talked about this
with Ian because people with right
hemisphere damage get kind of tyrannical
and authoritarian and they get very
reductionistic and and much more than
someone who's neurologically intact and
I asked him well is that worse among
people who were already that way before
the brain damage right is there
individual variation so if you were a
narrowing intellect with an
authoritarian bent were you more like
that if you damaged your right
Hemisphere and of course there isn't
enough case history to know that but I'm
wondering there's an
insistence in archaic literature I I've
really seen this in the biblical Corpus
I just wrote a book about this which is
going to come out in November I'm
lecturing about it now so it's very much
on my mind that that narrowing
proclivity is a it's like the sin of
Adam's job in the Garden of Eden his job
is to name and subdue right to name and
put in place but Pride it's the pride
element that seems to warp that it's
like it isn't even so much that we
narrow it's that we narrow and then we
fall in love with our own narrowing and
that's the pride and then we want to
substitute that narrowing for reality
itself this is what God warns again
about by the way in the story of of Adam
and Eve when he tells both of them that
they can't eat of the fruit of the
knowledge of Good and Evil this idea is
lurking at the bottom of that it's like
you can do what you want but you
can't you can't replace the moral order
with your own set of
preconceptual and that's what you're
pointing to right I don't want to put
put words in your mouth but that's but
that's what's lurking underneath this
it's not merely it's not the reduction
per se because that's necessary to have
a point it's something like is it the
totalitarian insistence that we got the
reduction right and that's
that yes we we uh confuse the world with
our image or our concept of the world we
confused uh the person uh with the uh
idea have of the person yeah so you can
see it's my sense that that's allied
with the totalitarian proclivity because
I think that becomes pathologized when
it's allied with
Force right it's that yeah well it's
that not only do I want you to be in the
Box I put you in plus everything else
but if you're not then look the hell out
from me because I can I can oppos that
so here's a cool
thing so the in the story of Moses Moses
is leading the Israelites to the
promised land right so it's a it's a
it's a quest story and that's the land
of milk and honey right it's the land of
Eternal promise and so that's always
what we're doing and that's what a
leader is always doing if he's any sort
of leader at all now Moses fundamental
temptation is to use
Force which is the temptation of a
leader and he uses force a number of
time times in the story but when he's on
the verge of leading the Israelites into
the promised land God tells him the
Israelites run out of water and God
tells Moses to use his words to elicit
water from the rocks and Moses doesn't
he hits the rocks with his Rod of
authority he strikes them twice and God
God tells him that he won't enter the
promised land as a consequence of that
and I think that's I think that's a
story of the Eli of narrowing and force
right it's that well leader has to
specify a direction and that does mean
the sacrifice of all other potential
directions obviously and then you might
say Well when does that go too far and
it's something like well when it's no
longer
Invitational when it's imposed it it
crosses the
line when you don't listen to The Rock
the only way you will get water out of
the rock is if you listen to The Rock
and interact with The Rock
if you just punish the rock or hit the
rock you you're not having a fair
interaction with The Rock and I so what
power is is about not listening doing
stuff to people without listening their
for their cries and and the Sorrows yeah
of course if you're the president and
and you can hit that bottom and you can
kill 100,000 people there's no way you
could know about the screaming you
produce and that's power so so okay so
that ties into your now earlier you
juxtaposed love against evil and you
assimilated love to relation and you
said everything in your world was
relational so the insistence in the
biblical Corpus is that our fundamental
mode of being in the world is relational
right that's what the covenantal idea is
attempting to express it's relational
and there's a so but I'm curious about
see you said something very specific
there right because you
Associated love as the antithesis of
evil and you immediately also expanded
that to describe relational and you said
that your interaction with the world is
relational at every level okay so what
do you mean by that and and how did you
come to
that understanding on on several levels
um one thing that I've been dealing a
lot with in the past year has been the
quantum physics that seems very
different from all of what we are
talking about here but there's in in
this quantum physics uh a strong uh
tradition of interpreting it as all
relations relationships and all the
problems you get uh in interpreting
quantum mechanics is when you when you
say it's out there it's an object it's
independent of me and when you start
thinking that way you have all these
dilemas and and paradoxes of quantum
mechanics if you think of it all as
relationships you enter into and that
it's not meaningful to ask what is the
world like when I don't interact with
it that that is not simply not a
meaningful question to ask because if I
don't interact with the with the world
how could I mean doesn't make sense to
ask how how it would be if I don't do
that so in many walks of life I find the
same basic structure it's relational and
that you have to accept that
uh unperformed experiments have no out
coms I
mean if if if you don't do things
nothing happens uh and and our social
relations of the same nature that it's
all about interacting and what is this
guy like really if I don't interact with
him I don't know what is this guy like
really if you don't interact I don't
know I'm a relational preacher in that
sense and what's happening inside my
head is relational and I think that's
that's in many ways the most fundamental
aspect of this whole Consciousness thing
is to understand that my Consciousness
is the collective of human beings in my
head I sort of I I see and understand
and put words to the world through some
kind of eyes of everyone the the
collective eye of everyone yeah yeah
that's my Consciousness uh and then I
have my private experience my sort of
mystical experience my psychedelic
experience if you like I'm not very much
into that but but you could have that
and that's sort of very direct and very
W um but but it's also very private and
and and then you can have this um I see
the world through the eyes of of my
friends and their
Concepts uh and that's what
Consciousness is about and that's why
it's so useful and also uh dangerous if
we if we forget the rest okay so that so
is it fair to say that you you've
concluded that
that that there that the that what's
real is no difference there's no
difference between what's real and what
emerges as a consequence of what's
relational and that's that's the
pinpoint of Consciousness I
mean right it establishes that see and
I'm the reason partly the reason I'm
curious about this is it
it's because of the implications of what
we've been describing it's like well if
the
phenomenal makes itself apparent as a
consequence of your
aim then reality itself emerges in
consequence of your aim and I actually
believe that's I don't know how true
that is but it's pretty damn true like
the way a person is going to reveal
themsel to you is very radically
dependent on your aim in the interaction
and this is true even for very bad
people like I've had some people in my
clinical practice who were they were
terrifying people and you had to step
very carefully around them but it was
possible to do that not always not I'm
not going to get like wildly over
optimistic about that but it was
dependent to some degree on my skill in
specifying my aim you know like I would
say the more dangerous the person the
better targeted your aim bloody well
better be when you're dealing with the
more look the hell out right they're
very a particularly dangerous person is
likely to respond very violently very
violently to even minor moral errors on
your part that's for sure when you're
dealing with them but it is it is an
unspecified
question to the the degree to which
reveal reality reveals itself in
accordance with our aim is a very is a
very much unspecified question I think
the relationship is far deeper than we
dare to imagine
I come to think for some reason
this may maybe a while tanking to take
the first time I was in New York City of
New York many years ago as a European
you know as a naive
European um I was I was worried it was
in back in the 80s I was worried that
the crime and I
would get into trouble at all kind and I
met another Danish guy in New York and I
asked him what what do I do you live in
this neighborhood that's known for high
crime rate when I come to visit you how
how how do I do that without getting you
know knocked over and he say it's very
simple just look as if you just appear
to other people as if you have a purpose
with what you're doing right right right
yeah you want to go somewhere and
therefore you go through this street
because you want to go down and visit me
and they won't they won't touch you but
the moment you come in and you say I'm
an interested tourist and I would like
to see people live in in a poor life and
New York is all crime and I want to see
that yeah they'll hit then you're a prey
animal yeah and yeah but but also you
are intruding in their world yeah right
right yeah yeah absolutely well when you
have when you have your I want to go
there go there because I have a friend
to visit and that's my aim that's my
target that's what I'm doing then you're
not annoying them because you're you
you're doing something and I think that
yeah in in interaction with people who
have who are in trouble who have
difficulties in
life uh it's important
to that yourself you show that there's
something I want to do with my life I'm
interested in stuff I'm also interested
in you uh not because of of of I I want
to sneeze on your life or something but
I I'm just I'm open to you but I'm going
this way and I think that's um it's it's
it's an anecdote to illustrate this what
you're saying actually y yep well look
sir we're at our 93 minute Mark so
that's pretty good that's actually a
pretty good place to end too and so um I
just I'll close this way so I have a
list of recommended books online it's
hundred of them and they're books that
were you know had a market influence on
me and I picked the books very carefully
and yours is one of them that user
illusion I think that's the best book
that is the best book on Consciousness I
ever read and I read a lot of them so I
would recommend that book to anybody
who's watching and listening it's it's
it's quite the tour to force I thought
it was very well grounded scientifically
it's very well written it's very
accessible and it really helped me think
through the relationship between
compression and focus and reduction and
Consciousness and that was useful I'd
already been interested in huxley's idea
you know of the reducing valve um which
you know as as as a function of
Consciousness trying to to to think that
through but you you elaborated on that
made it clear in a way that I have I
haven't actually seen anyone else do now
you know friston's work and so forth is
a nice elaboration of that and I think
the same about Gibson but but your book
pulled in the linguistic in a way that I
thought was extremely original and
useful so so for everybody who's
watching and listening the user illusion
that's a book I'd highly recommend it
it's got a lot to teach you and it's
deeper than you might think too because
it's an elegant book and it's clearly
written and it so its depth is somewhat
um hidden which is also the mark of a
master author right so yeah and I had a
blast talking to you today we went all
sorts of interesting places um so I'd
like to thank you for that for everybody
watching and listening I'd like to thank
you guys for your time and attention and
as always and I'm going to continue to
talk to Tor nor trenders on The Daily
wire side of things I'm going to walk
through his life in a bit more detail um
he's written a lot of books we only
focused on one really and and made
reference to some of the others but
we'll flesh that out a little bit and
see where else we can we can get and so
if you want to join us on that Venture
please feel free um to the film crew
here in Toronto today thank you very
much for your time and and your help and
for how smoothly it and to the Daily
wire people who put this together and
make it free for everyone which is you
know pretty good deal for everybody as
far as I'm concerned they deserve
continual thanks for that and to you
thank you very much for spending 90
minutes with us and letting us know
sharing the fruits of your
thought thank you for having me that was
a great great
fun all right sir
[Music]